9128 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
Behavioral Biometrics for Continuous
Authentication in the Internet-of-Things Era:
An Artiﬁcial Intelligence Perspective
Y unji Liang , Sagar Samtani, Bin Guo ,a n dZ h i w e nY u , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—In the Internet-of-Things (IoT) era, user authenti-
cation is essential to ensure the security of connected devices
and the customization of passive services. However, conventional
knowledge-based and physiological biometric-based authentica-
tion systems (e.g., password, face recognition, and ﬁngerprints)
are susceptible to shoulder surﬁng attacks, smudge attacks, and
heat attacks. The powerful sensing capabilities of IoT devices,
including smartphones, wearables, robots, and autonomous vehi-
cles enable continuous authentication (CA) based on behavioral
biometrics. The artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) approaches hold signif-
icant promise in sifting through large volumes of heterogeneous
biometrics data to offer unprecedented user authentication and
user identiﬁcation capabilities. In this survey article, we outline
the nature of CA in IoT applications, highlight the key behav-
ioral signals, and summarize the extant solutions from an AI
perspective. Based on our systematic and comprehensive analy-
sis, we discuss the challenges and promising future directions to
guide the next generation of AI-based CA research.
Index Terms—Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), behavioral biometric,
body area networks, constrained devices, continuous authentica-
tion (CA), cyber–physical systems data mining, Internet of Things
(IoT).
I. I NTRODUCTION
W
ITH the ﬂourishing of the Internet of Things (IoT),
our daily life is being transformed by ambient intelli-
gence [1] along with massively connected IoT devices ranging
from smartphones and wearables to robots, autonomous vehi-
cles, and drones [2], [3]. The broad penetration of IoT devices
in the consumer market makes user authentication critically
important to secure users have the appropriate right to access
IoT devices [2] and to avoid the devastating damages caused
Manuscript received March 2, 2020; revised May 26, 2020; accepted
June 16, 2020. Date of publication June 22, 2020; date of current version
September 15, 2020. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2019YFB2102200;
in part by the Ministry of Health of China under Grant 2017ZX10303401-
002 and Grant 2017YFC1200302; in part by the Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61902320, Grant 71472175, Grant 71602184, and
Grant 71621002; in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant
CNS-1850362 and Grant OAC-1917117; and in part by the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 31020180QD140.
(Corresponding author: Yunji Liang.)
Y unji Liang, Bin Guo, and Zhiwen Y u are with the School of Computer
Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail:
liangyunji@nwpu.edu.cn).
Sagar Samtani is with the Operations and Decision Technologies
Department, Kelley School of Business, Indiana University, Tampa, FL 33602
USA.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2020.3004077
Fig. 1. Overview of credentials for user authentication and identiﬁcation and
their applications.
by one attack occurring in the local vulnerable spots [4]. Apart
from the security concerns, user authentication is beneﬁcial for
passive and customized services when user switching occurs.
For example, for one autonomous car shared among family
members, the driving habits among family members differ sig-
niﬁcantly. To assist the drivers, different assistance strategies
can be applied based on user identities [3]. Thus, user authenti-
cation can protect crucial information against potential attacks
and offer customized services for improved user experience.
Due to the importance of user authentication, researchers
and industries are increasingly studying the development of
sophisticated methods to verify and recognize user identi-
ties. As shown in Fig. 1, authentication systems can be
divided into three categories: 1) knowledge-based; 2) phys-
iological biometric-based; and 3) behavioral biometric-based
solutions [2], [5]. Knowledge-based authentication explicitly
requests the user to enter credentials, such as password,
2327-4662 c⃝ 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9129
Fig. 2. Mapping relationship between devices and users.
personal identiﬁcation number (PIN), and graphical PIN to
conﬁrm the identity of an individual. Physiological biometric-
based authentication uses biological traits (e.g., ﬁngerprint,
iris, and facial images) and employs the machine learning
methods to discriminate user identities. Behavioral biometrics,
including walking gait, keystroke, and touchscreen dynam-
ics are used for user authentication as well. Authentication
systems can be classiﬁed into two subcategories: 1) user
authentication, to detect whether the user is one unauthorized
visitor or genuine user and 2) user identiﬁcation, to recognize
whom the current user is.
The essence of authentication systems is to build the map-
ping relationship between users and objectives. According to
the object-user mapping relationship, authentication systems
can be categorized as Fig. 2. Among them, one-to-one map-
ping aims to verify whether the user is a genuine user or
imposter for one privately owned device (such as mobile
phones and laptops) or one mobile application. One-to-
many mapping provides the appropriate access control among
multiple users for one object shared within a group of per-
sons. In IoT systems, numerous smart devices are connected
to provide pervasive services for one user (such as smart home
and vehicle-to-vehicle systems [6]). In the dynamic environ-
ment, participants need to ﬁnish one session across shared
IoT devices where complex and robust authentication schemes
are needed [7]. The many-to-one mapping and many-to-many
mapping ﬁt well for the user authentication in the complex
dynamic environment.
Although numerous user authentication and identiﬁcation
methods are proposed, prior methods have several key draw-
backs as it pertains to their ﬁt with IoT applications.
Vulnerability: Prior systems are prone to a diverse range
of attacks. For knowledge-based authentication, imposters
can capture inputs by shoulder surﬁng and recording attacks
[8]–[10], thermal attack [11], [12], and smudge attacks
[13], [14]. For facial recognition, an adversary could conquer
the facial detection through legitimate users’ facial photos. The
ﬁngerprint can be conquered by smudge attack [13]–[15] and
forged by deep learning methods [16]. The automated speaker
veriﬁcation based on the personal characteristics of voices is
subject to replay attacks [17], [18].
Discreteness: In general, user identiﬁcation and authen-
tication are executed once at the beginning of a session.
If the authentication information is stolen or compromised,
imposters can fully control the hacked accounts or IoT devices,
resulting in devastating damages consequentially. In addition,
one-time user authentication is insecure in some scenarios. For
example, in the ride-sharing platforms, registered drivers may
subcontract ride assignments or share their registration to an
unauthorized person, which could be dangerous for the rid-
ers [3]. Thus, the one-time authentication method is insecure
and cannot provide seamless protection.
Obtrusiveness: Existing solutions require explicit inputs or
actions, which are obtrusive for users by requiring extra user
attention. They also cause a distraction from the undergo-
ing tasks [19], [20]. For example, iris and facial recognition
require users to stare at the camera in speciﬁc angles, which
is unnatural and uncomfortable for users.
In recent years, the rapid proliferation of IoT devices, such
as smartphones, wearable devices, and facility cameras has
made it possible to seamlessly sense and track user behaviors.
The analysis and mining of behavior ﬁngerprints offer new
opportunities for continuous authentication (CA) [21], [22].
In this article, we provide a systematic overview of the CA
based on behavioral biometrics from the perspective of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence (AI). Our contributions in this article are as
follows.
1) We provide a systematic overview of the key compo-
nents and differentiators between user authentication and
identiﬁcation.
2) We summarize the key elements of behavioral
biometrics.
3) We provide a summary of the emerging types of sensing
technologies being integrated into emerging IoT tech-
nologies, with a speciﬁc focus on how the data they
generate and common representations of these data.
4) We present a general framework on how future
researchers can develop innovative AI-based approaches
for continuous user authentication and identiﬁcation.
5) We summarize emerging directions for future AI-based
research in the aforementioned areas.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In
Section II, we characterize the nature of behavioral biomet-
rics. In Section III, we propose a general framework for
continuous user authentication from sensing and computing
perspectives. Sections IV and V provide one systematic sur-
vey about data sensing and inference methods, respectively.
Finally, Section VI presents the open issues and challenges in
CA based on behavioral biometrics, and Section VII concludes
this article.
II. C
HARACTERIZING BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS
Behavioral biometrics refer to the unique behavioral traits
that can be used for human authentication. Unlike the
knowledge-based credentials and physiological biometrics
shown in Fig. 1, behavioral biometrics identify people by
how a user conducts the speciﬁed activity rather than by
static information or physical characteristics. User authentica-
tion based on behavioral biometrics is characterized as secure,
continuous, transparent, and cost effective.
Secure: In contrast to knowledge-based credentials and
physiological biometrics, behavioral biometrics provide a
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9130 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
dynamic modality that is completely passive and works in the
background, making it impossible to copy or steal. Behavioral
biometric data are extracted when users are performing one
speciﬁed activity. Unlike the static authentication information,
the nature of behavioral biometric data ensures that they cannot
be forgotten, exchanged, and stolen. Moreover, the dynamics
of activities make it very difﬁcult to forge behavioral bio-
metrics. Authentication systems based on knowledge-based
credentials and physiological biometrics are vulnerable to a
variety of cyberattacks, including shoulder surﬁng attacks,
smudge attacks, replay attacks, thermal attacks, and adver-
sary attacks [8]–[10], [13], [14]. Systems based on behavioral
biometrics are secure and robust to the aforementioned cyber-
attacks.
Continuous: In the IoT era, user authentication is one cru-
cial task to secure the connected devices and it should not
be a one-off event but rather a constant process. Unlike the
one-time authentication that is enforced at the beginning of a
session or login, continuous user authentication is an essen-
tial requirement to verify that users are who they claim to be
on an ongoing basis. In order to achieve this goal, behavioral
biometrics continuously proﬁle a user’s behavior based upon
the natural interactions without having to constantly interrupt
users. The continuity of behavior makes it a natural way for
CA with no distraction for users.
Unobtrusive: Unobtrusive sensing aims to monitor physical
activities and behaviors continuously via sensors embedded
in the ambient environment or wearable sensors [23], and
maximize the user experience to avoid disturbing users from
the undergoing tasks [24]. Behavioral data can be sampled
when users are interacting with IoT devices or ambient envi-
ronments with no explicit input. Moreover, user authentication
can be performed in a transparent and unobtrusive way with
no distraction for users [25]. Previous attempts to continu-
ously authenticate may have been too disruptive (e.g., prompts
mid session), but now by using unobtrusive sensing techniques
users can be continuously authenticated without interruption.
This feature is beneﬁcial for the enhancement of user experi-
ence and provides more secure protection for IoT devices.
Cost Effective: Physiological biometrics usually rely on
customized hardware for information acquisition [26], [27].
This is often expensive in terms of costs and impedes the
widespread adoption of physiological biometrics for user
authentication. In contrast, behavioral biometrics can be
observed and sampled with embedded sensors in IoT devices
(e.g., microphone, touchscreen, accelerometer in smartphone,
and wearable devices) or public facilities (e.g., WiFi access
point and surveillance camera). The widespread availability
of IoT devices makes it possible to sense behaviors without
extra hardware, which improves the acceptance of behavioral
biometrics with low cost and ease of use.
III. O
VERVIEW OF CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION
To guide the readers to understand the core concepts in
this survey article, we provide an overview of CA systems
to illustrate what components should be included in the
one behavior-based CA system. Speciﬁcally, we present an
Fig. 3. Abstract framework of CA and identiﬁcation based on behavioral
signals.
abstract framework of CA and identiﬁcation based on behav-
ioral signals to highlight the primary components for user
authentication. As shown in Fig. 3, it consists of four layers:
1) behavioral signals;2 )unobtrusive sensing;3 ) continuous
computing; and 4) applications.
Behavioral signals are the collection of distinctive behav-
ioral patterns or traits that can be used by one decision-making
system to decide an individual’s identity. A large number
of pilot studies show that dynamics of a keystroke, walking
gaits, eye movements, and touchscreen dynamics are suitable
for CA.
Unobtrusive sensing summarizes the available sensors and
feasible sensing strategies to capture the behavioral signals.
The sensing modalities for behavioral signals are diverse. In
the IoT era, the unprecedented sensing capability brings oppor-
tunities to sense the behavior in different granularities with
diverse sensors. For example, walking gaits can be captured by
facility cameras, accelerometers built-in wearables, and WiFi
signals that bounceoff the walking individuals. IoT devices,
such as smartphones and wearables are infused into our daily
life and can provide transparent, unobtrusive, and continu-
ous behavior sensing without additional attentions and actions
required.
Continuous computing highlights the workﬂow for CA. The
goals of CA based on behavioral biometrics are to detect
whether the user has the right to access the IoT device or
not ( authentication) and to recognize who the current user is
(identiﬁcation). Accordingly, CA based on behavioral biomet-
rics can be divided into two categories: 1) anomaly detection
and 2) classiﬁcation. Anomaly detection methods can deter-
mine the abnormal patterns from the regular ones. For user
identiﬁcation, one predictive model is trained to maximize the
interclass differences (i.e., legitimate users versus outliers).
Applications are typical scenarios where CA based on
behavioral biometrics is applied. According to the property of
devices, user authentication can be applied in three categories
of IoT devices or scenarios, including private devices, shared
devices, and open application environments. Apart from IoT
device security issues for access control, behavioral biomet-
rics can be applied for customized services in smart space.
For example, for one autonomous car shared among family
members, insurance companies can design tailored insurance
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9131
policies according to individual’s driving patterns, where the
continuous user identiﬁcation based on driving patterns is the
premise. For smart spaces, understanding the presence of users
in the buildings is signiﬁcantly important for providing more
responsive and customized services [28].
IV . S
ENSING OF BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS
Numerous behavioral traits have been explored for CA. In
this section, we analyze the commonly used behavioral traits
for use authentication, and conduct comprehensive comparison
from different dimensions, including vulnerability, discretenss,
obtrusiveness, and privacy.
A. Keystroke Dynamics
Keystroke dynamics characterize the typing rhythm, such as
keystroke length, the distance between consecutive strokes, the
pressure exerted on each key when the individual types char-
acters, and others. To date, keystroke-powered authentication
has been broadly explored for devices equipped with physical
keyboards. With the emergence of touchscreens, when users
enter characters via touchscreens, subtle changes of built-in
sensors, including accelerometer and gyroscope occur. Jointly
combined with the status of built-in sensors, the keystroke
timing, touch-typing, and keystroke pressure are distinctive
features for user identiﬁcation [29], [30]. Similarly, mouse
usage dynamics have also been shown to serve as potential
authentication cues [31], [32].
The advantages of analyzing keystroke dynamics include the
unobtrusive data collection and continuous monitoring of typ-
ing behaviors when users interact with devices simultaneously.
However, the keystroke dynamics vary in different scenarios,
such as walking, holding at hand, and putting on table [33].
As a result, keystroke-based user authentication is scenario
dependent, which requires the understanding of user scenarios
and build the appropriate algorithms accordingly.
B. Touchscreen Dynamics
With the prevalence of touchscreen in IoT devices, sophis-
ticated interaction patterns, including pressure intensity and
sliding dynamics when users interact with touchscreen enable
the detection of user identiﬁcation in an unobtrusive way [34].
One type of study combines touch patterns with the conven-
tional authentication method, such as PIN codes or shaped-
based drawing when individuals are running the log-in session.
Even though more patterns are extracted to protect the devices
against potential attacks, the authentication method is still
static. For CA, Sitová et al. [22] analyzed the micromovement
and orientation dynamics resulting from how a user grasps,
holds, and taps on the smartphone and leveraged the context
and touchscreen dynamics for user authentication.
The authentication based on touch operations provides one
natural way to collect user interaction data. Moreover, it makes
continuous user identiﬁcation possible with no extra sen-
sors and low computational load. However, touch operations
vary among applications. Therefore, systematically studying
application-dependent touch patterns can help protect against
unauthorized access of crucial mobile applications. This is
Fig. 4. User authentication and identiﬁcation based on walking gaits via
different sensors, including cameras, wearables, smart ﬂoor, and device-free
sensing.
especially true when individuals are likely to possess more
than one mobile device. When they interact with different
devices, whether the touch dynamics are identical and can be
transferred among different devices are still open questions.
C. Eye Movement
Driven by the internal interaction relationship between mus-
cles and brain neural, eye movements, including gaze and
blinking are signiﬁcantly different for individuals and are dif-
ﬁcult to be mimicked and duplicated. Authentication based on
eye movements can be divided into two categories in terms of
data signals. Bioelectrical signals caused by eye movements
and blinks are studied and found that the accompanying elec-
trooculogram signals extracted from eye blinking were unique
and rational as the biometrics for identiﬁcation recognition
tasks [35]. The dynamics of eye movements, including pupil-
lary response to stimuli, pupil size, velocity, acceleration, and
spatial/geometric features are recorded and analyzed from the
video. Several studies that demonstrated those patterns were
intrinsic and could be applied for user identiﬁcation [36]–[38].
However, eye-movement-based solutions often use expen-
sive and specialized monitor-mounted gaze trackers. Such
explicit authentication methods may cause vigilance of the
imposter and cover the camera of the tracker. These authentica-
tion methods also have high energy consumption for continu-
ous video recording and real-time video analysis. Furthermore,
eye-movement-based user identiﬁcation can be obtrusive to an
individual’s privacy.
D. Walking Gait
Identifying and authenticating based on walking gaits are an
emerging biometric technology that recognizes users’ identi-
ties by analyzing walking patterns [25]. Based on the strategies
of data acquisition, the sensing strategies of gait signals can
be grouped as: facility cameras, ﬂoor sensors, and wearables.
Fig. 4 illustrates the interplay and relationships among the
three components.
Vision-based solutions record an individual’s gait patterns
when walking via facility cameras. Then, background segmen-
tation techniques are used to extract features from recorded
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9132 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
images to verify user identities [39], [40]. However, the
vision-based solutions are subject to environments, includ-
ing illumination and camera angle [39], [41]. Furthermore,
the high computation consumption and privacy concerns make
vision-based solutions infeasible for CA.
For ﬂoor-sensor based solutions, dense press sensors are
deployed under the ﬂoor to track the pressure dynamics or
acoustic patterns when walking on the ﬂoor [42]. Its advan-
tages include high resolution in terms of performance and
unobtrusiveness for user interaction [43]. However, ﬂoor-
sensor-based solutions are ideal for CA for two reasons. First,
they often have sophisticated system design and high costs.
Second, they only work in an enclosed environment with
limited users and do not work in the open space with low
scalability. Taken together, these limitations often result in
ﬂoor-based systems being difﬁcult to deploy.
Wearable sensor-based solutions rely on sensors attached
to different spots of the body (such as waist, hip, and
pocket) to capture the accompanying signals when walk-
ing, therefore, enabling continuous veriﬁcation of user iden-
tity [44]–[48]. However, primary studies are conducted in the
laboratories with cumbersome prototype systems and expen-
sive customized devices. Recently, more studies focus on
user veriﬁcation based on off-the-shelf devices (e.g., mobile
phones) [49]–[51]. The main advantage of using a wearable
accelerometer sensor for gait recognition is that it provides
unobtrusive veriﬁcation without requiring user explicit actions.
Especially, the accelerometer sensor has characters of small
volume, low cost, and can be easily integrated into the
hardware of wearable devices.
Lately, walking gait recognition based on WiFi, millime-
ter wave, and radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is gaining
attention [52]. These studies assume that the unique walking
gaits and body shapes entail distinctive disturbances in signals
that can be used for user veriﬁcation [53]. Wang et al. [54] pro-
vided one comprehensive survey about the device-free sensing
based on WiFi signals. Several user veriﬁcation systems
based on WiFi signals are available, including WiFiID [55],
WiWho [56], WiFiU [57], and FreeSense [58]. Among
them, FreeSense [58] is an unobtrusive system for indoor
human identiﬁcation based on the disturbed WiFi channel-state
information (CSI) signals when individuals walk through the
line-of-sight (LOS) path between the source and the receiver
of WiFi signals. FreeSense captures the disturbing waveforms
when the user is walking across the LOS path, and applies
the discrete wavelet transform and principal component anal-
ysis to extract shape features. The performance of FreeSense
declines from 94.5% to 75.5% while the number of partici-
pants increases from two to nine. Luo et al. [52] used RFID
for gait recognition by monitoring the interruptions to RFID
signals when one target user is blocking the signals between
transmitters and receivers.
However, CA based on walking gaits has several challenges.
First, prior studies were mainly conducted in a controlled
environment. Robustness should be further evaluated in the
physical world. Second, a person’s walking gaits can be
altered by many factors, i.e., drunkenness, aging, carrying
a load, and shoe type [59]–[61]. The model trained with
the data set collected in one situation may introduce bias
when it is applied to other situations [62]. Third, prior stud-
ies mainly focus on single-person gait detection. However,
vision-based, ﬂoor-based, and WiFi-based solutions achieve
suboptimal performances for multiperson scenarios.
E. Body Gesture
With the popularity of wearable sensors, body gestures
especially hand gestures have been widely studied for user
authentication. The majority of user authentication based on
body gestures attempt to verify or recognize the user iden-
tity based on a speciﬁed gesture performed. Among them,
Li et al. [66] found that a person’s head movement patterns
are unique when stimulated by music beats, and implemented
the Headbanger, an authentication system that can authenti-
cate uses by sensing head movements when listening to music
beats based on the built-in accelerator in Google glasses. In
addition, hand gesture and in-air handwriting are studied for
user authentication as well. Matsuo et al. [65] designed one
authentication system based on the acceleration signals during
the arm sweep action. Lu et al. [68] proposed a multifactor
user authentication framework using both the motion signal
of a piece of in-air handwriting and the geometry of the hand
skeleton captured by a depth camera. However, user authen-
tication based on body gestures is obtrusive as the users are
required to perform certain movements or actions.
F . Others
Chewing renders the changes of muscle tension with accom-
panying chewing sounds. Zou et al. [69] proposed a human
authentication mechanism that utilized the sounds generated
by dental occlusion (i.e., tooth click) to unlock the mobile
devices. The prototype system, BiLock, relies on the micro-
phone in mobile devices to record the sounds of dental
occlusion and veriﬁes whether the current user is legitimate
or not. Although BiLock is easy to use and requires no
extra sensing unit, its performance is sensitive to the scenario.
Furthermore, BiLock requires users to put the mobile device
5–15 cm away from lips, which is obtrusive for users and does
not support transparent sensing. Similarly, Bodybeat leverages
the nonspeech body sounds caused by food intake, breath,
laughter, and cough for user identiﬁcation [70].
In addition, breathing is used for user authentication as well
by characterizing the subtle vibration caused by respiratory.
For example, BreathPrint employs deep-learning models to
effectively express the acoustic features caused by breathing
for user authentication on resource-constrained devices [71].
To provide unobtrusive CA, Liu et al. [72] proposed a con-
tinuous user veriﬁcation system based on unique human
respiratory-biometric characteristics extracted from the off-
the-shelf WiFi signals.
G. Summary of Behavioral Biometrics
As shown in Table I, each behavioral biometric has its pros
and cons, and no single biometric is expected to effectively
meet all the needs of any scenarios and applications [73].
The advantages of most user authentication systems based on
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9133
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF BEHA VIORAL SIGNALS FOR USER AUTHENTICA TION
behavioral biometrics include nonobtrusiveness with no extra
user attention required and nonvulnerability against cyberat-
tacks. However, the existing authentication systems do not take
advantage of the nature of behavioral traits to support the CA
and do not consider the issue of privacy protection.
V . AI-B
ASED SOLUTIONS FOR USER AUTHENTICA TION
In this section, we summarize the AI-based methods that
are employed to recognize user identities based on behavioral
ﬁngerprints. In CA, intelligent algorithms, including machine
learning and deep learning are capable of determining the
access control of IoT devices by checking user identities. As
shown in Fig. 5, the pipeline of AI-based methods for CA con-
sists of the following major components: data preprocessing,
feature extraction, and classiﬁcation algorithms . We further
describe each component in the following sections.
A. Data Preprocessing
Data preprocessing is a critical procedure to distill high-
quality data out of the raw data that are generally incomplete,
noisy, inconsistent, and redundant. As the inputs of continuous
human identiﬁcation based on behavioral patterns are sequen-
tial data, data ﬁltering and data segmentation are necessary to
reduce the noisy data and align the inputs.
For data ﬁltering, numerous ﬁlters are applied to the sequen-
tial data to remove data that can be repetitive, irrelevant, or
even sensitive [55], [69]. For example, a Butterworth ﬁlter is
applied to WiFi CSI data to remove the high-frequency noisy
Fig. 5. General workﬂow of machine learning-based user identiﬁcation and
authentication.
data [55], [56]. Similarly, BiLock uses a six-order Butterworth
ﬁlter to remove the out-of-band interference of dental clicks,
and employs wavelet denoising to improve the signal to noise
radio [69].
For the CA, data segmentation seeks effective regions
from sequential data. The rule-based solutions, including ﬁxed
threshold or ﬁxed-size windows are used over sequential data
for segmentation. In WiFi-ID [55], two frequency bands are
used to separate WiFi signals impacted by walking gaits from
the wavelet domain. The ﬁxed-size window is applied [74],
[75] to segment the dynamic swipe behavior and video records
of walking gaits into ﬁxed-length slices, respectively. However,
rule-based solutions are sensitive to inputs and tightly rely
on prior knowledge. Dynamic segmentation strategies are
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9134 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
introduced to split the stream data dynamically. For exam-
ple, BehaveSense [76] recognizes four touchscreen operations
to separate the effective samples from stream data and utilizes
the sequential patterns of touchscreen operations for user iden-
tiﬁcation. In addition, dynamic time warping (DTW) is widely
used to ﬁnd out the cycle of behaviors [56], [58], [66].
B. Feature Extraction
Feature engineering is to extract features of value that
can represent users’ behavior comprehensively from the train-
ing data set. The extracted features depend on sensors and
applications. Statistical features refer to the measurements of
interpreting both quantitative and qualitative data with stan-
dard statistics, such as the root mean square, mean, standard
deviation, and variance. Statistical features characterize the
overall patterns of the given samples from macroperspectives.
Due to the dynamics of user behaviors over time, frequency-
domain patterns of behaviors are of signiﬁcance for describing
the dynamics of signals. To obtain frequency-domain patterns,
sampled data are transformed by spectrum analysis to learn the
frequency-domain features. As shown in Table II, DeepAuth
characterizes the frequency-domain representation of motion
sensors [74]. GlassGuard [77] and BiLock [69] employ the
mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCCs) to characterize
the dynamics of vocal signals.
Generally, hand-crafted feature engineering heavily relies
on the knowledge of domain experts and is time consuming
to construct one complete feature set. As a result, it is the
bottleneck of classiﬁcation-oriented tasks. In addition, as not
all hand-crafted features are preeminently contributive to the
veriﬁcation of user identity, feature selection is optional to
rebuild one subset of attributes with least data loss. To mitigate
the behavioral variability of mouse dynamics, Cai et al. [81]
proposed a uniﬁed framework of employing dimensionality
reduction methods to extract predominant characteristics from
the original feature space for enhanced performance and found
that variability reduction in feature engineering could enhance
the authentication mechanisms. On the other hand, due to these
drawbacks of feature engineering, many researchers in this
ﬁeld have turned to deep learning-based methods. Unlike con-
ventional machine learning that relies on feature engineering,
deep learning approaches utilize the complex neural network
architecture to learn the representation of behaviors [75].
C. Anomaly-Based User Authentication
For the privately owned IoT devices, a large number of
positive examples from the legitimate users are available
while negative examples from imposters are rare. Therefore,
supervised classiﬁcation algorithms do not ﬁt well to train
predictive models when few negative examples are avail-
able [82]. To secure the privately owned devices, anomaly
detection solutions are applied to check whether the current
user is one authorized user or one imposter. Behavioral exam-
ples from imposters are referred as anomalies or outliers,
and the behavioral examples from genuine users are normal.
Identifying outliers or anomaly detection is referred as one-
class classiﬁcation. For the user authentication task, one-class
Fig. 6. General workﬂow of machine learning-based user identiﬁcation and
authentication [87].
classiﬁcation algorithms, including one-class support vector
machines (SVMs) [83] and isolated forest (iForest) [84] are
widely adopted for imbalanced data sets with severely skewed
class distributions.
One-class SVM [83] is a semisupervised classiﬁcation algo-
rithm, and aims to ﬁnd a hyperplane to enclose the majority
of positive examples from the origin with the maximum mar-
gin [85]. Given the training vectors x
i ∈ℜ n, the problem is
formulated as follows [82]:
min
w,ξ,ρ
1
2wT w + 1
vℓ
∑
i
ξi − ρ
subject to wT · φ(xi) ≥ ρ− ξi,ξ i ≥ 0( 1 )
where w is the normal vector of the separating hyperplane
and ξi are slack variables. The parameter v ∈ (0, 1] con-
trols the tradeoff between w and slack variables ξi. When
w and ρ are solved by solving (1), the decision function
f(x) = sgn(∑
i αik(xi, x) − ρ) will be positive for majority
examples, where k(xi, x) is a kernel function [86]. In the con-
text of behavior-based user authentication, the workﬂow of
one-class SVM is shown in Fig. 6 to highlight how the outliers
are separated from the origin. An outlier is any data instance
that lies outside the support of the training data. The original
high-dimensional data can be projected into one feature space
via one kernel function, where the hyperplane w separates the
training data from the origin by a maximal margin ρ/∥w∥
(Fig. 6). Data mapped to the same side of the origin will be
given a negative one-class SVM value, whereas those mapped
to the side of the training data will have positive values [87].
iForest [84], [88] is one unsupervised algorithm for anomaly
detection. Its main idea is based on the observation that anoma-
lies are few in number and much different from the rest
of the data [84]. Speciﬁcally, iForest constructs an ensem-
ble of binary search trees (named iTrees) in which anomaly
points are isolated closer to the root of the tree. Each node
in iTree has either two children or a leaf node with no
child. For one p-dimensional sample x
i ∈ℜ p from data set
D ={ x1, x2,..., xi,..., xn}, one feature ai ∈ [1, p] and its
split value V′ are randomly selected. According to feature Vai,k
for each input data Xk, Vai,k, which is less than V′, is classi-
ﬁed into left children set and the rest is classiﬁed into right
children set. This process is repeated for the instances of left
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9135
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF WORKS IN CONTINUOUS BEHA VIORAL AUTHENTICA TION AND IDENTIFICA TION
and right children nodes until: 1) the incoming data set D has
only one record or all data in D have the same value and 2) the
tree reaches the height limit l [84], [88].
iForest is applied for user authentication due to the follow-
ing reasons. First, the feature values extracted corresponding to
the anomalies in original data are few and different. Second,
iForest works well when handling extremely large data size
and high-dimensional problems and in situations where the
training set does not contain any anomalies. Finally, since
iForest has linear time complexity, fast anomaly detection on
resource-constrained IoT devices is crucial to report unautho-
rized access immediately.
D. Classiﬁcation Algorithms for User Identiﬁcation
User identiﬁcation aims to recognize who the current user
is and further determine whether the current user has the
legitimate right to access the IoT devices or applications.
Formally, behavior-based user identiﬁcation can be formulated
as follows. Given a data set {(x
1, y1) ,...,( xn, yn)}, where
xi = [x1
i ,..., xm
i ]i st h e m-dimensional feature vector of sam-
ples; yi ∈ C is the corresponding class of one speciﬁc user; and
C refers to the set of classes. The goal of the user identiﬁca-
tion task is to learn a mapping function that predicts the label
information for one given behavior sequence with least biases.
According to the adopted classiﬁcation algorithms, the extant
behavior-based user identiﬁcation systems can be divided into
two categories: 1) conventional and 2) deep learning-based
solutions.
1) Conventional Classiﬁcation: As shown in Table II,
numerous hand-crafted features, such as statistical features of
mouse dynamics, keystroke dynamics of touch-typing timing,
and even frequency domain signals are proposed and a variety
of supervised classiﬁcation algorithms, including SVM [69],
random forest [63], naïve Bayes [29], and artiﬁcial neural
network [80] are employed to bridge the mapping between
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9136 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
feature sets and labels. However, user identiﬁcation based on
conventional classiﬁcation algorithms relies on feature engi-
neering, which involves computing explicit features speciﬁed
by experts, resulting in algorithms designed to detect spe-
ciﬁc indictors. The hand-crafting feature is time consuming,
labor intensive, and not suitable for rapidly evolving domains.
Moreover, supervised learning algorithms are sensitive to the
training data set. Usually, the features used in those approaches
are based on samples made from the existing data set. Due
to the intrauser variation of behavioral biometrics [89], these
solutions are not robust when faced with the changes in user
behaviors and cannot adjust the parameters accordingly.
2) Deep Learning-Based Classiﬁcation: To improve the
performance of identiﬁcation systems, deep learning solutions
are gaining popularity. Deep learning-based solutions can be
divided into three categories according to the types of neural
networks: 1) convolutional neural network (CNN); 2) recur-
rent neural network (RNN); and 3) generative adversarial
network (GAN).
As shown in Fig. 7(a), a typical CNN consists of convolu-
tional layer, pooling layer , fully connected layer, and softmax
layer.I nt h econvolutional layer , convolution is a linear oper-
ation that involves the multiplication of a set of weights (also
referred as ﬁlter) with the input. The convolutional layer cre-
ates one feature map by applying the same ﬁlter on the input
repetitively to summarize the presence of a speciﬁc type of
features in the input. The pooling layer operates upon each
feature map and provides an approach to downsampling fea-
ture maps by summarizing the presence of features in patches
of the feature map. Two common pooling methods are average
pooling and max pooling. For the fully connected layer, all the
neurons in this layer are connected to every activation unit of
the next layer operates on a ﬂattened input where each input
is connected to all the neurons. For one classiﬁcation task, a
softmax layer follows the ﬁnal fully connected layer immedi-
ately to limit the output of the function into the range 0–1,
which can be interpreted directly as a probability of multiple
classes.
CNN is widely adopted in user authentication and identiﬁca-
tion systems to detect personal patterns from ﬁngerprints [90]
and eyes [91], [92]. CNN is also commonly applied to
detect the liveness of biometrics against presentation attacks
[93]–[98]. For the security of smart vehicles, Xun et al.
designed one driver ﬁngerprinting device for the continuous
user authentication of automobiles. The driver ﬁngerprinting
device is deployed in automobiles to collect the real-time driv-
ing data from the onboard diagnostic port and uses the CNN
model to extract driver behavioral characteristics from the driv-
ing data. Finally, the extracted driving features are fed to SVM
for illegal driver detection [99]. To secure the smart home,
Qin et al. [100] extracted the time and frequency features of
sensors via CNN for each time slot, and fed the deep represen-
tation to RNN for user identiﬁcation. Batchuluun et al. [75]
applied CNN to identify human identity based on the walk-
ing gaits extracted from videos. Unlike gait recognition in the
controlled environment, Zou et al. studied the user identiﬁ-
cation based on the waling gait in the wild, and proposed a
hybrid model of CNN and RNN to learn robust gait feature
representation, including space and time-domain features [101]
h
t = tanh
(
Whht−1 + Wyxt
)
yt = Wyht. (2)
RNN is a typical neural network to handle with sequence
data, and the output of the prior state is forwarded as the input
to the current state. This process can be formulated as (2),
where x
t is the input at time t; ht and ht−1 are the current state
and previous state, respectively; and Wh and Wx are feedfor-
ward and recurrent weight matrices, respectively. The output
y
t at time t is produced by combining the hidden state ht with
the weight matrix Wy. However, RNNs are subject to gradi-
ent vanishing and exploding problems [102]. In addition, the
training of RNN is time consuming and energy intensive [103].
To address those problems, long short-term memory (LSTM)
is proposed. The architecture of one cell in LSTM is shown
in Fig. 7(b). One LSTM cell consists of forget gate, input
gate, and output gate.T h e forget layer, denoted as f
t, controls
whether the previous hide state ht−1 is forwarded to the cur-
rent state ht, where σ is a sigmoid activation function. The
input gate it determines to what extent new memory is added
into the cells state, and an output gate ot regulates how gates
at the next step will be affected by the previous cell state ht−1
and current input xt
ft = σ
(
Wf ·
[
ht−1 , xt
]
+ bf
)
it = σ
(
Wi ·
[
ht−1 , xt
]
+ bi
)
˜ct = tanh
(
Wc ·
[
ht−1 , xt
]
+ bc
)
ct = ft ∗ct−1 + it ∗˜ct
ot = σ
(
Wo
[
ht−1 , xt
]
+ bo
)
ht = ot ∗tanh(ct). (3)
Numerous user authentication and identiﬁcation studies
based on behavioral biometrics show that RNN and its variants
are promising to process the sequential behavior data with an
overwhelming performance. For example, Zhang et al. [104]
extracted discriminate features from walking gaits monitored
by smartphones and the LSTM-based model for user identiﬁ-
cation. Due to the limitation of resource-constrained devices
in memory and computation, Chauhan et al. proposed one efﬁ-
cient authentication system based on breathing acoustics. They
introduced model compression solutions, including weight
quantization and fully connected layer factorization to reduce
the complexity of LSTM, and found that compressed LSTM
outperformed other baselines with smaller model size, lower
inference time, and more accurate [105]. Luo et al. [52]
used RFID for gait recognition by monitoring interruptions to
RFID signals and introduced attention mechanisms in LSTM
for robust user identiﬁcation. Amini et al. [74] proposed an
LSTM-based authentication framework that leveraged a user’s
behavior captured by motion sensors while shopping online
to continuously reauthenticate the user, providing security
without compromising usability. DeepAuth [106] uses unique
motion patterns when users entering passwords as behavioral
biometrics and learns the deep representation of motion pat-
terns via an RNN-based model. Extensive experiments show
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9137
Fig. 7. Diagram of selected prevailing deep neural networks. (a) Architecture of CNN. (b) Architecture of an LSTM cell. (c) Diagram of GAN.
that DeepAuth performs well for the security of resource-
constrained devices within both authentication performance
and cost [106].
GAN is an unsupervised algorithm to train two competitive
neural networks via a cooperative zero-sum game frame-
work [107]. The GAN model consists of two submodels: 1) a
generator model to generate new examples and 2) a discrimina-
tor model to classify whether generated examples are real data
or generated examples. As shown in Fig. 7(c), the generator
network G(z) takes an random input z with probability distri-
bution p(z) and generates a sample of synthetical examples.
The discriminator network D(x ) takes input either the real
examples x from p
data(x) or synthetical examples generated
by G(z), and attempts to predict whether the input is real or
generated. The adversary learning of G(z) and D(x) can be rep-
resented mathematically as min max Ex∼p data(x)[l o gD(x)] +
Ez∼p z(z)[l o g(1 − D(G(z)))] [108]. GAN has been widely
adopted by the adversary to generate high ﬁdelity human
biometrics, including ﬁngerprints [109] and facial and vocal
biometrics [16], [110] to bypass the authentication systems.
For example, DeepMasterPrints [109] employed GAN to gen-
erate synthetic image-level ﬁngerprints. In DeepMasterPrints,
two generator networks are trained via the Wasserstein GAN
algorithm based on ﬁngerprints scanned with a capacitive
sensor and a data set of inked and rolled ﬁngerprints. The
experimental results show that DeepMasterPrints is able
to generate ﬁngerprints that can easily bypass the popular
commercial ﬁngerprint matching systems.
E. Evaluation
For the evaluation of a veriﬁcation system, the false accep-
tance rate (FAR) and the false rejection rate (FRR) are two
types of errors. FAR refers the likelihood that an unautho-
rized user is mistakenly accepted as a legitimate user; while
FRR indicates the probability that a legitimate user is incor-
rectly rejected as an imposter. V eriﬁcation systems should
avoid those two error types. To balance the two error types in
a veriﬁcation system, an equal error rate (EER) is introduced
to predetermine the threshold value where FAR is equal to
FRR. EER is a commonly accepted overall measure of system
performance. The lower the EER, the higher the accuracy of
the veriﬁcation system.
VI. O
PPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
CA-based behavioral traits are an emerging paradigm fac-
ing several challenges. In this section, we enumerate the
opportunities and challenges from the AI-perspective.
A. Evolution of Behavioral Biometrics
The performance of CA-based behavioral biometrics could
be impacted by scenarios and applications. For instance, alco-
hol, mood, and carrying a backpack may affect the person’s
gaits [111], [112]. Pupil size and eye movement dynam-
ics vary with individuals’ physical status, such as stress or
fatigue [113]. In addition, touch patterns are sensitive to screen
size and target applications. Obviously, user behaviors can be
impaired by many facets, including mood, health, and alcohol.
How to rule out the impacts of situations on user behaviors in
the CA systems is crucial for the robustness of behavior-based
authentication systems.
User behaviors also change over time. For example,
Galbally et al. analyzed the effects of age and aging on ﬁn-
gerprints, and found that ﬁngerprint quality decreased linearly
with age for elders [114]. The touchscreen typing patterns are
dynamic and impacted by health status [115]. However, what
kinds of behavioral patterns can be used as behavioral biomet-
rics for CA have not been studied yet. In addition, the extant
behavior-based systems are static and cannot adjust themselves
with the evolution of user behaviors. Therefore, fundamental
studies should be conducted to evaluate the impacts of dynam-
ics of behavioral traits on CA and propose dynamic solutions
that ﬁt well with the changes in behavior evolution.
B. Sparsity of Behavioral Biometrics
The success of machine learning roots in tapping into the
large-scale training data set to learn the comprehensive repre-
sentation of the rapid advances of AI-based methods. A large
number of users are becoming multidevice users by interacting
with more than one IoT devices [116]. The one-to-many map-
ping relationship between users and IoT devices poses great
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9138 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
challenges for CA-based on behavioral biometrics. In addition,
the sufﬁcient training data set is not readily available, and the
trained models based on the skewed distribution data sets are
not robust [117].
To address the sparsity of behavioral biometrics, one/zero-
shot learning aims to build one classiﬁer from one or only
a few training samples [118]. The nature of one/zero-shot
learning is suitable for handling the sparsity problem of behav-
ioral biometrics. Meanwhile, as user preferences of multiple
IoT devices are signiﬁcantly different, the interaction records
collected from different IoT devices are different. For exam-
ple, the keystroke rhythm can be captured when interacting
with PC; and the touchscreen dynamics are collected via the
mobile phone or tablets. To handle the imbalanced classiﬁca-
tion problem and smoothly conduct the user authentication on
heterogeneous IoT devices, transfer learning [119], [120] is
promising to transfer the trained model based on behavioral
records collected on one source device to the target device.
In addition, to address the sparsity of labeled data, AutoTune
uses the wireless identiﬁer as a supervisory label and learns the
association between facial images and wireless identiﬁer [121].
C. Deep Learning on Resource-Constrained IoT Devices
In general, IoT devices, including smartphones and wear-
ables are resource-constrained with limited memory, power
supply, and computing capability [122]. Although deep learn-
ing algorithms achieved state-of-the-art performance, deep
learning models are becoming extremely complex with mil-
lions of hyperparameters [123], time-consuming training, sig-
niﬁcant energy strains [103], [124], and do not work well
on resource-constrained IoT devices by debilitating levels of
system overhead [122]. To execute deep learning-based mod-
els on resource-constrained devices, the following two types
of solutions are proposed.
Model compression of deep learning has become a sig-
niﬁcant problem. Methods to reduce the complexity of deep
neural networks include tensor decomposition [125], [126],
pruning [124], [127], and parameter sharing [128]–[130].
Tensor decomposition reduces model complexity by express-
ing a higher order tensor with a sequence of linear operations
on the matrix singular value decomposition [126]. Neural
pruning eliminates the less important connections in one pre-
trained model to reduce the computational cost by compressing
hyperparameters [131] or multiobjective optimization based on
accuracy, latency, and energy [132]. Parameter sharing [133]
is mainly applied in convolutional layers to reduce the size
of parameters by the assumption that the input going to be
processed by the network is decomposable into a set of local
regions with the same nature and thus each of them can be
processed with the same set of transformations [130], [133].
Edge computing is shedding lights on mobile devices-
oriented deep learning [134], [135]. Via edge intelligence, the
complex and energy-intensive deep neural networks can be
partitioned into tiny subtasks, and be distributively executed
on neighboring devices or edges [136]–[138]. For example,
Kang et al. [136] designed a lightweight scheduler to auto-
matically balance the computational ofﬂoad between mobile
devices and servers by partitioning the neural network layers.
Xu et al. [138] proposed DeepWear to optimize the energy
consumption of wearables by ofﬂoading the deep learning
tasks among mobile devices.
Although there are many pilot studies about deep learn-
ing on resource-constrained IoT devices, they are evaluated in
the laboratory environments. As a result, the performance is
not generalizable to other contexts (e.g., smart home) due to
the extreme heterogeneity of IoT environments [139]. In addi-
tion, CA on resource-constrained IoT devices is very sensitive
to latency. A novel framework is essential to understand the
tradeoff among accuracy, critical latency, and efﬁciency [140].
D. Emerging Malicious Attacks
CA based on behavioral biometrics cannot be easily attacked
by a random attacker. However, the nature of CA based on
behavioral biometrics does not imply that the CA systems are
secure.
First, most authentication systems-based behavioral biomet-
rics are prototypes evaluated in a constrained laboratory envi-
ronment with limited participants. Comprehensive evaluations
with a large number of participants are needed to investi-
gate the performance of existing behavior-based authentication
systems when faced with potential attacks.
Second, IoT systems are faced with numerous security
threats on physical, protocol, communication, and application
layers [27]. For example, in the low-power wireless network,
the energy depletion attack can drain the batteries of devices
rapidly by forcing sensors or actuators to execute energy-
intensive tasks. Consequently, the entire network could fail due
to battery exhaustion [141]. For the electrical vehicles, batter-
ies could be attacked (e.g., draining energy) to reduce driving
range and increase driving range anxiety. Kang and Shen [142]
proposed a battery authentication method based on user habits
to identify users that share a vehicle. In addition, the thermal
attacks rely on the heat transferred from users to interactive
devices, and exploit heat traces in the wake of user interaction
with devices to uncover the entered credentials [11]. On the
communication layer, the heterogeneous communication pro-
tocols are subject to attacks, such as eavesdropping, sinkhole,
hello ﬂood, and collision [143], [144]. V oice assistants, such as
Google Assistant, Amazon Alexa, Facebook Portal, and Apple
Siri are vulnerable to signal injection attacks on microphones
based on the photoacoustic effect across large distances and
through glass windows.
1
Third, AI is widely applied by imposters to hack the authen-
tication and identiﬁcation systems. For example, AI has been
maliciously used by the imposters to infer the password.
Snoopy demonstrates that it is possible to infer password
entered on mobile devices by monitoring both accelerome-
ters and gyroscopes [145]. Snoopy may fool the potential
users as a harmless app to continuously monitor the motion
sensors when users are taping the passwords, and uses bidirec-
tional RNN for most commonly used password inference and
encoder–decoder architecture with RNN models for universal
password interference [145]. Another prevailing example is
1https://lightcommands.com/
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9139
the usage of AI by the adversary to reconstruct the biometrics
(i.e., replay attack). Deep generative models (DGMs), such as
GANs and variational autoencoder (V AE) have been widely
adopted to generate high ﬁdelity human biometrics, including
ﬁngerprints [109] and facial and vocal biometrics [16], [110]
to bypass the authentication systems.
E. Fusion of Behavioral Biometrics
Since prior solutions are insufﬁcient to effectively provide
secure protection in a broad range of IoT scenarios, multifactor
authentication (MFA) provides multiple layers of security to
protect IoT devices against potential attacks through the fusion
of behavioral biometrics [2].
The early form of MFA integrated multiple authentication
schemes sequentially. For example, Hu et al. [146] proposed
a secure data backup scheme by integrating password and
biometrics to overcome the potential attacks. Multiview rep-
resentation learning for user authentication has emerged as
a viable approach to process such data. This paradigm of
machine learning aims to fuse multiple views (i.e., feature
sets) to improve the performance [147], [148]. Multiview
representation learning can be categorized into two groups:
1) multimodal methods and 2) multiview methods.
Multimodal solutions extract features from heterogeneous
biometrics to build one classiﬁer based on the ensembled fea-
tures. Kim et al. [149] designed one multimodal authentication
system by fusing features obtained from face, teeth, and voice
modalities to secure mobile devices. Crawford et al. utilized
the keystroke dynamics and speaker veriﬁcation to enhance
the authentication performance on mobile devices with a 67%
reduction of explicit authentication [150]. EchoPrint emits
nearly inaudible sound signals from the earpiece speaker
to illuminate the user’s face. The extracted acoustic fea-
tures from the echoes are combined with visual facial land-
marks from the frontal camera to authenticate the user [151].
Gomi et al. [152] integrated physiological biometrics, behav-
ioral traits, and online activities, including search, shopping,
and Web browsing for user authentication. Kumar et al. uti-
lized LSTM to model the motion sensors and adopted CNN to
extract gait patterns from video, respectively, and a Gray wolf
optimizer has been used to optimize the parameters during
fusion [153]. V Auth collects the body vibrations of the user
and matches it with the speech signal received by the voice
assistant’s microphone. By fusing multimodal data, V Auth
shows robust performance against potential attacks, includ-
ing replay attacks, mangled voice attacks, or impersonation
attacks [154]. To against the replay attacks, REVOLT exploits
the spectral differences between original and replayed voice
signals, and combines the breathing rate extracted from the
WiFi signal while speaking to detect the liveness [155].
Multiview-based solutions for user authentication mainly
extracted ﬁne-grained feature maps from multiview images.
For example, Li et al. [156] employed the multiview deep rep-
resentation learning to recognize one million celebrities from
their face images captured in the real world. On the other
hand, multiview learning can be applied for user authentication
to address the incompletion of obtained biometrics by fusing
multiple views [157].
In addition, contextual information can enhance the
performance of user authentication. Hintze et al. [158] intro-
duced dynamic factors, such as day and time, and location
together with multimodal biometrics to adjust the authenti-
cation scheme accordingly. Wójtowicz and Joachimiak [159]
presented one context-based biometric authentication model,
which chooses the appropriate authentication method dynam-
ically according to the interaction form.
F . Cross-Device Continuous Authentication
Increasingly, a large number of users are becoming mul-
tidevice users by interacting with multiple smart devices
[116], [160]. For instance, more than 70% of online users
access the Internet across multiple devices. 90% use multiple
screens sequentially to accomplish a task over time.
2 The
complexity of multidevice–multiuser interaction presents sig-
niﬁcant challenges for cross-device CA. Prior studies assume
the one-to-one mapping between user and device and mainly
focus on the user authentication in the single-device sce-
nario. However, the relationships between users and devices
in multiuser–multidevice scenarios are many to many. Due
to the heterogeneity of devices, transferring one pretrained
user identiﬁcation model from the source domain to the tar-
get domain is rarely studied. There are signiﬁcant differences
in interaction modality among heterogeneous devices. For
devices with similar interaction modalities, transfer learning
is one promising solution [116]. In addition, the co-location
information of devices is useful for cross-device authenti-
cation. Hintze et al. [160] proposed one multimodal and
cross-device authentication system based on behavioral and
physiological biometrics (e.g., gait, voice, face, and keystroke
dynamics) to reduce the manual burden of user veriﬁcation
according to the context, such as location, time of day, and
nearby devices.
G. Privacy Concerns
Behavior-based authentication systems are subject to pri-
vacy concerns, especially when they are adopted for person-
alized services. To address privacy concerns, many privacy
protection solutions are proposed to secure crucial information
in different authentication systems [161].
For the standalone authentication systems, although users
are able to control the standalone client, they are likely to
subject to exposing data to unauthorized third parties [161].
To secure the sensitive data in standalone systems, privacy
impact assessment and surveillance impact assessment should
be enforced to ensure conformance with legal and regulatory
requirements [161]. Moreover, anonymity and encryption are
promising to protect against data exposure in privately owned
devices. For the centralized authentication systems, they may
suffer from data exposure in transit and adversary attacks
in computation models by carefully crafted adversarial sam-
ples [162]. Blockchain keeps the sensitive data private such
that others cannot trace and infer sensitive data stored in the
block [163]. However, the centralized authentication systems
2https://www.readinbrief.com/multi-device-content-consumption-statistics-
trends/
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9140 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
may suffer from the bottle problem due to the limitation of a
single centralized server [7].
For the distributed authentication systems, blockchain and
federated learning [164], [165] show a great potential to
provide privacy-preserving authentication in collaborative
applications. Federated learning is a machine learning tech-
nique that trains an algorithm across multiple decentralized
edge devices or servers holding local data samples, with-
out exchanging their data samples. This approach contrasts
with traditional centralized machine learning techniques where
all data samples are uploaded to one server, as well as to
more classical decentralized approaches which assume that
local data samples are identically distributed [164]–[166]. The
nature of federated learning not only can prevent data sharing
among devices but also avoid the enormous communication
costs. In addition, other privacy-preserving machine learning
approaches, such as multiparty computation (MPC) and homo-
morphic encryption are getting more attraction recently. For
intrusted participants, the MPC is able to calculate a joint
function in a decentralized network on the premise of ensuring
privacy and independence of input [167].
VII. C
ONCLUSION
In the IoT era, user authentication and identiﬁcation are
critical to ensure the security of connected things and the cus-
tomization of passive services. However, conventional identi-
ﬁcation methods suffer from several key drawbacks, including
discreteness, obtrusiveness, and vulnerability. In this article,
we propose the CA based on behavioral biometrics, charac-
terize the key features of CA based on user behaviors (e.g.,
invulnerability, continuity, unobtrusiveness, and convenience),
and summarize the existing CA solutions from sensing and
computing. Based on this taxonomy, we discuss the challenges
and open issues from the perspective of AI.
R
EFERENCES
[1] D. J. Cook, J. C. Augusto, and V . R. Jakkula, “Ambient intelli-
gence: Technologies, applications, and opportunities,” Pervasive Mobile
Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 277–298, 2009.
[2] A. Ometov, V . Petrov, S. Bezzateev, S. Andreev, Y . Koucheryavy,
and M. Gerla, “Challenges of multi-factor authentication for secur-
ing advanced IoT applications,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 82–88,
Mar./Apr. 2019.
[3] S. Gupta, A. Buriro, and B. Crispo, “DriverAuth: A risk-based multi-
modal biometric-based driver authentication scheme for ride-sharing
platforms,” Comput. Security , vol. 83, pp. 122–139, Jun. 2019.
[4] Y . Sun, B. Wang, S. Li, Z. Sun, H. M. Nguyen, and T. Q. Duong,
“Manipulation with domino effect for cache- and buffer-enabled
social IIoT: Preserving stability in tripartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5389–5400, Aug. 2020.
[5] A. K. Jain, A. Ross, and S. Pankanti, “Biometrics: A tool for
information security,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 125–143, Jun. 2006.
[6] L. Tang, Z. Duan, Y . Zhu, J. Ma, and Z. Liu, “Recommendation
for ridesharing groups through destination prediction on trajectory
data,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , early access, Dec. 27, 2019,
doi: 10.1109/TITS.2019.2961170.
[7] H. Liu, P . Zhang, G. Pu, T. Y ang, S. Maharjan, and Y . Zhang,
“Blockchain empowered cooperative authentication with data traceabil-
ity in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. V eh. Technol., vol. 69,
no. 4, pp. 4221–4232, Apr. 2020.
[8] T. Kwon and J. Hong, “Analysis and improvement of a pin-entry
method resilient to shoulder-surﬁng and recording attacks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 278–292, Feb. 2015.
[9] M. ˇCagalj, T. Perkovi ´c, and M. Bugari ´c, “Timing attacks on cognitive
authentication schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics Security , vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 584–596, Mar. 2015.
[10] T. Chen, M. Farcasin, and E. Chan-Tin, “Smartphone passcode
prediction,” IET Inf. Security, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 431–437, 2018.
[11] Y . Abdelrahman, M. Khamis, S. Schneegass, and F. Alt, “Stay cool!
Understanding thermal attacks on mobile-based user authentication,”
in Proc. ACM Conf. Human Factors Comput. Syst. (CHI) , 2017,
pp. 3751–3763.
[12] D. Li, X.-P . Zhang, M. Hu, G. Zhai, and X. Y ang, “Physical password
breaking via thermal sequence analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics
Security, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1142–1154, May 2019.
[13] A. J. Aviv, K. Gibson, E. Mossop, M. Blaze, and J. M. Smith, “Smudge
attacks on smartphone touch screens,” in Proc. 4th USENIX Conf.
Offensive Technol. (WOOT), Berkeley, CA, USA, 2010, pp. 1–7.
[14] S. Schneegass, F. Steimle, A. Bulling, F. Alt, and A. Schmidt,
“SmudgeSafe: Geometric image transformations for smudge-resistant
user authentication,” in Proc. ACM Int. Joint Conf. Pervasive
Ubiquitous Comput. (UbiComp) , 2014, pp. 775–786.
[15] S. Kim, H. Lee, and T. Kwon, “Poster: Rethinking ﬁngerprint iden-
tiﬁcation on smartphones,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Security (CCS) , 2017, pp. 2515–2517.
[16] A. Roy, N. Memon, and A. Ross, “MasterPrint: Exploring the vulnera-
bility of partial ﬁngerprint-based authentication systems,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 2013–2025, Sep. 2017.
[17] Y . Ren, Z. Fang, D. Liu, and C. Chen, “Replay attack detection based
on distortion by loudspeaker for voice authentication,” Multimedia
Tools Appl., vol. 78, pp. 8383–8396, Nov. 2019.
[18] Y . Wang, W. Cai, T. Gu, W. Shao, Y . Li, and Y . Y u, “Secure
your voice: An oral airﬂow-based continuous liveness detection for
voice assistants,” Proc. ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol., vol. 3, no. 4, p. 157, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3369811
[19] M. Gil, P . Giner, and V . Pelechano, “Personalization for unobtru-
sive service interaction,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. , vol. 16, no. 5,
pp. 543–561, J
un. 2012.
[20] Y . Sui, X. Zou, E. Y . Du, and F. Li, “Design and analysis of a highly
user-friendly, secure, privacy-preserving, and revocable authentication
method,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 902–916, Apr. 2014.
[21] M. Frank, R. Biedert, E. Ma, I. Martinovic, and D. Song, “Touchalytics:
On the applicability of touchscreen input as a behavioral biometric for
continuous authentication,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics Security,v o l .8 ,
no. 1, pp. 136–148, Jan. 2013.
[22] Z. Sitová et al., “HMOG: New behavioral biometric features for con-
tinuous authentication of smartphone users,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics
Security, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 877–892, May 2016.
[23] Y .-L. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for
health informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5,
pp. 1538–1554, May 2014.
[24] M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century,” IEEE Pervasive
Comput., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 19–25, Jul. 2002.
[25] W. Meng, D. S. Wong, S. Furnell, and J. Zhou, “Surveying the devel-
opment of biometric user authentication on mobile phones,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1268–1293, 3rd Quart.,
2015.
[26] N. Sae-Bae, J. Wu, N. Memon, J. Konrad, and P . Ishwar, “Emerging
NUI-based methods for user authentication: A new taxonomy and sur-
vey,” IEEE Trans. Biometr . Behav. Identity Sci., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–31,
Jan. 2019.
[27] A. Mosenia and N. K. Jha, “A comprehensive study of security of
Internet-of-Things,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 5, no. 4,
pp. 586–602, Oct. 2017.
[28] C. X. Lu, H. Wen, S. Wang, A. Markham, and N. Trigoni, “SCAN:
Learning speaker identity from noisy sensor data,” in Proc. 16th
ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Sensor Netw. (IPSN) , 2017,
pp. 67–78.
[29] A. Buriro, B. Crispo, F. Del Frari, and K. Wrona, “Touchstroke:
Smartphone user authentication based on touch-typing biometrics,” in
New Trends in Image Analysis and Processing , V . Murino, E. Puppo,
D. Sona, M. Cristani, and C. Sansone, Eds. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2015, pp. 27–34.
[30] A. J. Aviv, B. Sapp, M. Blaze, and J. M. Smith, “Practicality of
accelerometer side channels on smartphones,” in Proc. 28th Annu.
Comput. Security Appl. Conf. (ACSAC) , 2012, pp. 41–50.
[31] O. Hamdy and I. Traoré, “Homogeneous physio-behavioral visual
and mouse-based biometric,” ACM Trans. Comput. Human Interact.,
vol. 18, no. 3, p. 12, Aug. 2011.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9141
[32] N. Zheng, A. Paloski, and H. Wang, “An efﬁcient user veriﬁcation
system using angle-based mouse movement biometrics,” ACM Trans.
Inf. Syst. Security, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1–27, Apr. 2016.
[33] J. Roh, S. Lee, and S. Kim, “Keystroke dynamics for authentication
in smartphone,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Converg.
(ICTC), Oct. 2016, pp. 1155–1159.
[34] L. Lu and Y . Liu, “Safeguard: User reauthentication on smartphones
via behavioral biometrics,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst.,v o l .2 ,
no. 3, pp. 53–64, Sep. 2015.
[35] M. Abo-Zahhad, S. M. Ahmed, and S. N. Abbas, “A novel biometric
approach for human identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation using eye blink-
ing signal,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 876–880,
Jul. 2015.
[36] Y . Zhang, W. Hu, W. Xu, C. T. Chou, and J. Hu, “Continuous authenti-
cation using eye movement response of implicit visual stimuli,” Proc.
ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. , vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 1–22, Jan. 2018.
[37] A. George and A. Routray, “A score level fusion method for eye
movement biometrics,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 82, pp. 207–215,
Oct. 2016.
[38] S. Eberz, K. B. Rasmussen, V . Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “Looks like
eve: Exposing insider threats using eye movement biometrics,” ACM
Trans. Privacy Security, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1–31, Jun. 2016.
[39] Z. Wu, Y . Huang, L. Wang, X. Wang, and T. Tan, “A comprehensive
study on cross-view gait based human identiﬁcation with deep CNNs,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 209–226,
Feb. 2017.
[40] J. P . Singh, S. Jain, S. Arora, and U. P . Singh, “Vision-based gait
recognition: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 70497–70527, 2018.
[41] Y . Liang, X. Zhou, Z. Y u, and B. Guo, “Energy-efﬁcient motion related
activity recognition on mobile devices for pervasive healthcare,” Mobile
Netw. Appl., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 303–317, Jun. 2014.
[42] M. U. B. Altaf, T. Butko, and B. Juang, “Acoustic gaits: Gait analy-
sis with footstep sounds,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62, no. 8,
pp. 2001–2011, Aug. 2015.
[43] H. Ma and W. Liao, “Human gait modeling and analysis using a semi-
Markov process with ground reaction forces,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 597–607, Jun. 2017.
[44] P . Casale, O. Pujol, and P . Radeva, “Personalization and user veriﬁ-
cation in wearable systems using biometric walking patterns,” Pers.
Ubiquitous Comput. , vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 563–580, Jun. 2012.
[45] D. Ma, G. Lan, W. Xu, M. Hassan, and W. Hu, “Unobtrusive user ver-
iﬁcation using piezoelectric energy harvesting,” in Proc. 14th EAI Int.
Conf. Mobile Ubiquitous Syst. Comput. Netw. Services (MobiQuitous),
2017, pp. 541–542.
[46] D. Baek, P . Musale, and J. Ryoo, “Walk to show your identity:
Gait-based seamless user authentication framework using deep neural
network,” in Proc. 5th ACM Workshop Wearable Syst. Appl. (WearSys),
2019, pp. 53–58.
[47] G. Cola, M. Avvenuti, F. Musso, and A. V ecchio, “Gait-based authen-
tication using a wrist-worn device,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Mobile
Ubiquitous Syst. Comput. Netw. Services (MOBIQUITOUS) , 2016,
pp. 208–217.
[48] M. D. Marsico and A. Mecca, “A survey on gait recognition via
wearable sensors,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1–39,
Aug. 2019.
[49] Y . Ren, Y . Chen, M. C. Chuah, and J. Y ang, “User veriﬁcation
leveraging gait recognition for smartphone enabled mobile healthcare
systems,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1961–1974,
Sep. 2015.
[50] F. Lin, A. Wang, Y . Zhuang, M. R. Tomita, and W. Xu, “Smart insole:
A wearable sensor device for unobtrusive gait monitoring in daily life,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 2281–2291, Dec. 2016.
[51] M. Muaaz and R. Mayrhofer, “Smartphone-based gait recognition:
From authentication to imitation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 3209–3221, Nov. 2017.
[52] C. Luo et al., “Gait recognition as a service for unobtrusive user iden-
tiﬁcation in
smart spaces,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 1–21, Mar. 2020.
[53] F. Xiao, Z. Guo, Y . Ni, X. Xie, S. Maharjan, and Y . Zhang, “Artiﬁcial
intelligence empowered mobile sensing for human ﬂow detection,”
IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 78–83, Jan./Feb. 2019.
[54] Z. Wang, B. Guo, Z. Y u, and X. Zhou, “Wi-Fi CSI-based behavior
recognition: From signals and actions to activities,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 109–115, May 2018.
[55] J. Zhang, B. Wei, W. Hu, S. S. Kanhere, and A. Tan, “Human identiﬁ-
cation using WiFi signal,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput.
Commun. Workshops (PerCom Workshops), Mar. 2016, pp. 1–2.
[56] Y . Zeng, P . H. Pathak, and P . Mohapatra, “WiWho: WiFi-based person
identiﬁcation in smart spaces,” in Proc. 15th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Inf.
Process. Sensor Netw. (IPSN), Apr. 2016, pp. 1–12.
[57] W. Wang, A. X. Liu, and M. Shahzad, “Gait recognition using WiFi
signals,” in Proc. ACM Int. Joint Conf. Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput.
(UbiComp), 2016, pp. 363–373.
[58] T. Xin et al., “FreeSense: A robust approach for indoor human detection
using Wi-Fi signals,” Proc. ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol., vol. 2, pp. 1–23, Sep. 2018.
[59] D. Gafurov, E. Snekkenes, and P . Bours, “Gait authentication and
identiﬁcation using wearable accelerometer sensor,” in Proc. IEEE
Workshop Autom. Identiﬁcation Adv. Technol., Jun. 2007, pp. 220–225.
[60] R. Cham and M. S. Redfern, “Changes in gait when anticipating
slippery ﬂoors,” Gait Posture, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 159–171, 2002.
[61] K. Singhal and J. B. Casebolt, “Chapter 8—Aging and gait,” in
Nutrition and Functional F oods for Healthy Aging ,R .R .W a t s o n ,E d .
London, U.K.: Academic, 2017, pp. 65–74.
[62] J. Liang, Y . Cao, C. Zhang, S. Chang, K. Bai, and Z. Xu, “Additive
adversarial learning for unbiased authentication,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2019, pp. 11420–11429.
[63] K. Diederichs, A. Qiu, and G. Shaker, “Wireless biometric individ-
ual identiﬁcation utilizing millimeter waves,” IEEE Sens. Lett.,v o l .1 ,
no. 1, pp. 1–4, Feb. 2017.
[64] N. Zhao et al., “Authentication in millimeter-wave body-centric
networks through wireless channel characterization,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 6616–6623, Dec. 2017.
[65] K. Matsuo, F. Okumura, M. Hashimoto, S. Sakazawa, and Y . Hatori,
“Arm swing identiﬁcation method with template update for long term
stability,” in Advances in Biometrics, S.-W. Lee and S. Z. Li, Eds.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2007, pp. 211–221.
[66] S. Li, A. Ashok, Y . Zhang, C. Xu, J. Lindqvist, and M. Gruteser,
“Whose move is it anyway? Authenticating smart wearable devices
using unique head movement patterns,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Pervasive Comput. Commun. (PerCom) , Mar. 2016, pp. 1–9.
[67] L. Lu et al., “Lip reading-based user authentication through acoustic
sensing on smartphones,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 447–460, Feb. 2019.
[68] D. Lu, D. Huang, Y . Deng, and A. Alshamrani, “Multifactor user
authentication with in-air-handwriting and hand geometry,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Biometr . (ICB) , Feb. 2018, pp. 255–262.
[69] Y . Zou, M. Zhao, Z. Zhou, J. Lin, M. Li, and K. Wu, “BiLock:
User authentication via dental occlusion biometrics,” Proc. ACM
Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–20,
Sep. 2018.
[70] T. Rahman et al., “BodyBeat: A mobile system for sensing non-speech
body sounds,” in Proc. 12th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Syst. Appl. Services
(MobiSys), 2014, pp. 2–13.
[71] J. Chauhan,
S. Seneviratne, Y . Hu, A. Misra, A. Seneviratne, and
Y . Lee, “Breathing-based authentication on resource-constrained IoT
devices using recurrent neural networks,” Computer, vol. 51, no. 5,
pp. 60–67, May 2018.
[72] J. Liu, Y . Dong, Y . Chen, Y . Wang, and T. Zhao, “Leveraging breath-
ing for continuous user authentication,” in Proc. ACM 24th Annu. Int.
Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw. (MobiCom), 2018, pp. 786–788. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3241539.3267743
[73] A. Alzubaidi and J. Kalita, “Authentication of smartphone users using
behavioral biometrics,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1998–2026, 3rd Quart., 2016.
[74] S. Amini, V . Noroozi, A. Pande, S. Gupte, P . S. Y u, and C. Kanich,
“DeepAuth: A framework for continuous user re-authentication in
mobile apps,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag.
(CIKM), 2018, pp. 2027–2035.
[75] G. Batchuluun, R. A. Naqvi, W. Kim, and K. R. Park,
“Body-movement-based human identiﬁcation using convolu-
tional neural network,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 101, pp. 56–77,
Jul. 2018.
[76] Y . Y ang, B. Guo, Z. Wang, M. Li, Z. Y u, and X. Zhou,
“BehaveSense: Continuous authentication for security-sensitive mobile
apps using behavioral biometrics,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 84, pp. 9–18,
Mar. 2019.
[77] G. Peng, D. T. Nguyen, G. Zhou, and S. Wang, “Poster: A contin-
uous and noninvasive user authentication system for Google glass,”
in Proc. 13th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Syst. Appl. Services (MobiSys) ,
2015, pp. 487–487.
[78] K. Song, Y . Zhou, H. Liu, and N. Zhu, “Isolated forest in keystroke
dynamics-based authentication: Only normal instances available for
training,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Appl. (ICCIA),
2017, pp. 63–67.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
9142 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 7, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020
[79] F. Hong, M. Wei, S. Y ou, Y . Feng, and Z. Guo, “Waving authentication:
Y our smartphone authenticate you on motion gesture,” in Proc. 33rd
Annu. ACM Conf. Extended Abstracts Human Factors Comput. Syst.
(CHI EA) , 2015, pp. 263–266.
[80] S. Mondal and P . Bours, “Continuous authentication and identiﬁcation
for mobile devices: Combining security and forensics,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Workshop Inf. F orensics Security (WIFS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[81] Z. Cai, C. Shen, and X. Guan, “Mitigating behavioral variability for
mouse dynamics: A dimensionality-reduction-based approach,” IEEE
Trans. Human–Mach. Syst. , vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 244–255, Apr. 2014.
[82] L. M. Manevitz and M. Y ousef, “One-class SVMs for document
classiﬁcation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 2, pp. 139–154, Mar. 2002.
[83] B. Schölkopf, R. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
“Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. 12th Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), Cambridge, MA, USA, 1999,
pp. 582–588.
[84] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. , 2008, pp. 413–422.
[85] D. Shin and S. Kim, “Nearest mean classiﬁcation via one-class
SVM,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Sci. Optim., vol. 1, 2009,
pp. 593–596.
[86] H. Lukashevich, S. Nowak, and P . Dunker, “Using one-class SVM out-
liers detection for veriﬁcation of collaboratively tagged image training
sets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo , 2009, pp. 682–685.
[87] Y . Guerbai, Y . Chibani, and N. Abbas, “One-class versus bi-class
SVM classiﬁer for off-line signature veriﬁcation,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Multimedia Comput. Syst. , 2012, pp. 206–210.
[88] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly detec-
tion,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–39,
Mar. 2012.
[89] L. M. Mayron, “Biometric authentication on mobile devices,” IEEE
Security Privacy, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 70–73, May/Jun. 2015.
[90] R. Das, E. Piciucco, E. Maiorana, and P . Campisi, “Convolutional neu-
ral network for ﬁnger-vein-based biometric identiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 360–373, Feb. 2019.
[91] Z. Zhao and A. Kumar, “Improving periocular recognition by explicit
attention to critical regions in deep neural network,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
F orensics Security, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 2937–2952, Dec. 2018.
[92] Q. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Sun, and T. Tan, “Deep feature fusion for iris and
periocular biometrics on mobile devices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics
Security, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 2897–2912, Nov. 2018.
[93] E. Park, X. Cui, T. H. B. Nguyen, and H. Kim, “Presentation attack
detection using a tiny fully convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
F orensics Security, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 3016–3025, Nov. 2019.
[94] R. F. Nogueira, R. de Alencar Lotufo, and R. C. Machado, “Fingerprint
liveness detection using convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1206–1213, Jun. 2016.
[95] W. Kang, H. Liu, W. Luo, and F. Deng, “Study of a full-view 3D
ﬁnger vein veriﬁcation technique,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics Security,
vol. 15, pp. 1175–1189, 2020.
[96] A. Czajka, “Pupil dynamics for iris liveness detection,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 726–735, Apr. 2015.
[97] O. V . Komogortsev, A. Karpov, and C. D. Holland, “Attack of mechan-
ical replicas: Liveness detection with eye movements,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
F orensics Security, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 716–725, Apr. 2015.
[98] C. Y uan et al., “Fingerprint liveness detection using an improved CNN
with image scale equalization,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 26953–26966,
2019.
[99] Y . Xun, J. Liu, N. Kato, Y . Fang, and Y . Zhang, “Automobile driver
ﬁngerprinting: A new machine learning based authentication scheme,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1417–1426, Feb. 2020.
[100] Z. Qin et al.,
 “Learning-aided user identiﬁcation using smartphone
sensors for smart homes,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5,
pp. 7760–7772, Oct. 2019.
[101] Q. Zou, Y . Wang, Q. Wang, Y . Zhao, and Q. Li, “Deep learning-
based gait recognition using smartphones in the wild,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3197–3212, Apr. 2020.
[102] R. Pascanu, T. Mikolov, and Y . Bengio, “On the difﬁculty of train-
ing recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(ICML), vol. 28, 2013, pp. 1310–1318.
[103] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, “Energy and policy con-
siderations for deep learning in NLP,” in Proc. 57th Annu. Meeting
Assoc. Comput. Linguist. , Jul. 2019, pp. 3645–3650.
[104] H. Zhang, J. Liu, K. Li, H. Tan, and G. Wang, “Gait learning
based authentication for intelligent things,” IEEE Trans. V eh. Technol.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4450–4459, Apr. 2020.
[105] J. Chauhan, J. Rajasegaran, S. Seneviratne, A. Misra, A. Seneviratne,
and Y . Lee, “Performance characterization of deep learning models for
breathing-based authentication on resource-constrained devices,” Proc.
ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. , vol. 2, no. 4,
p. 158, Dec. 2018.
[106] C. X. Lu et al., “DeepAuth: In-situ authentication for smartwatches
via deeply learned behavioural biometrics,” in Proc. ACM Int. Symp.
Wearable Comput. (ISWC) , 2018, pp. 204–207.
[107] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 27th Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), vol. 2, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[108] A. Creswell, T. White, V . Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta,
and A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial networks: An overview,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2018.
[109] P . Bontrager, A. Roy, J. Togelius, N. Memon, and A. Ross,
“DeepMasterPrints: Generating MasterPrints for dictionary attacks via
latent variable evolution,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Biometr . Theory
Appl. Syst. (BTAS), 2018, pp. 1–9.
[110] A. van den Oord et al., “WaveNet: A generative model for raw audio,”
Sep. 2016. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1609.03499.
[111] H. N. Ahmad and T. M. Barbosa, “The effects of backpack carriage
on gait kinematics and kinetics of schoolchildren,” Sci. Rep. ,v o l .9 ,
no. 3364, pp. 86–95, 2019.
[112] G. F. D. Greenstein, “Gait and balance deﬁcits in chronic alcoholics: No
improvement from 10 weeks through 1 year abstinence,” Alcoholism
Clin. Exp. Res. , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 89–95, 2012.
[113] R. Z. Marandi, P . Madeleine, O. Omland, N. Vuillerme, and A. Samani,
“Eye movement characteristics reﬂected fatigue development in
both young and elderly individuals,” Sci. Rep., vol. 8, Sep. 2018,
Art. no. 13148.
[114] J. Galbally, R. Haraksim, and L. Beslay, “A study of age and ageing
in ﬁngerprint biometrics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 14,
no. 5, pp. 1351–1365, May 2019.
[115] D. Iakovakis, S. Hadjidimitriou, V . Charisis, S. Bostantzopoulou,
Z. Katsarou, and L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Touchscreen typing-pattern
analysis for detecting ﬁne motor skills decline in early-stage
Parkinson’s disease,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 8, p. 7663, May 2018.
[116] X. Wang, T. Y u, M. Zeng, and P . Tague, “XREC: Behavior-based
user recognition across mobile devices,” Proc. ACM Interact. Mobile
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 1–26, Sep. 2017.
[117] K. Cao, C. Wei, A. Gaidon, N. Arechiga, and T. Ma, “Learning imbal-
anced datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss,” in Proc. 32nd
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2019, pp. 1567–1578.
[118] S. Rahman, S. Khan, and F. Porikli, “A uniﬁed approach for conven-
tional zero-shot, generalized zero-shot, and few-shot learning,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 5652–5667, Nov. 2018.
[119] S. J. Pan and Q. Y ang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng. , vol.
 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2010.
[120] S. Al-Stouhi and C. K. Reddy, “Transfer learning for class imbal-
ance problems with inadequate data,” Knowl. Inf. Syst. , vol. 48, no. 1,
pp. 201–228, Jul. 2016.
[121] C. X. Lu et al., “Autonomous learning for face recognition in the wild
via ambient wireless cues,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf. (WWW),
2019, pp. 1175–1186.
[122] N. D. Lane, S. Bhattacharya, P . Georgiev, C. Forlivesi, and F. Kawsar,
“An early resource characterization of deep learning on wearables,
smartphones and Internet-of-Things devices,” in Proc. Int. Workshop
Internet Things Towards Appl. (IoT-App), 2015, pp. 7–12.
[123] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V . Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018.
[Online]. Available: arXiv:abs/1803.01271.
[124] T. Y ang, Y . Chen, and V . Sze, “Designing energy-efﬁcient convolutional
neural networks using energy-aware pruning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , Jul. 2017, pp. 6071–6079.
[125] N. D. Lane et al., “DeepX: A software accelerator for low-power deep
learning inference on mobile devices,” in Proc. 15th ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. Inf. Process. Sensor Netw. (IPSN) , Apr. 2016, pp. 1–12.
[126] S. Bhattacharya and N. D. Lane, “Sparsiﬁcation and separation of
deep learning layers for constrained resource inference on wearables,”
in Proc. 14th ACM Conf. Embedded Netw. Sensor Syst. CD-ROM
(SenSys), 2016, pp. 176–189.
[127] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. J. Dally, “Learning both weights and
connections for efﬁcient neural networks,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), vol. 1, 2015, pp. 1135–1143.
[128] R. Appuswamy et al., “Structured convolution matrices for
energy-efﬁcient deep learning,” Jun. 2016. [Online]. Available:
arXiv:1606.02407.
[129] Z. Lu, V . Sindhwani, and T. N. Sainath, “Learning compact recur-
rent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
Process. (ICASSP) , Mar. 2016, pp. 5960–5964.
[130] H. Pham, M. Y . Guan, B. Zoph, Q. V . Le, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient
neural architecture search via parameter sharing,” in Proc. ICML, 2018,
pp. 4092–4101.
[131] X. Zhang, X. Zhou, M. Lin, and J. Sun, “ShufﬂeNet: An extremely
efﬁcient convolutional neural network for mobile devices,” in Proc.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2018, pp. 6848–6856.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIANG et al. : BEHA VIORAL BIOMETRICS FOR CONTINUOUS AUTHENTICA TION IN INTERNET-OF-THINGS ERA 9143
[132] X. Dai et al., “ChamNet: Towards efﬁcient network design through
platform-aware model adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , Jun. 2019, pp. 11398–11407.
[133] L. Duong, T. Cohn, S. Bird, and P . Cook, “Low resource dependency
parsing: Cross-lingual parameter sharing in a neural network parser,”
in Proc. 53rd Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 7th Int. Joint
Conf. Nat. Lang. Process. Short Papers , vol. 2, Jul. 2015, pp. 845–850.
[134] J. Chen and X. Ran, “Deep learning with edge computing: A review,”
Proc. IEEE , vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1655–1674, Aug. 2019.
[135] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, and J. Zhang, “Edge
intelligence: Paving the last mile of artiﬁcial intelligence with edge
computing,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1738–1762, Aug. 2019.
[136] Y . Kang et al., “Neurosurgeon: Collaborative intelligence between the
cloud and mobile edge,” SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News , vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 615–629, Apr. 2017.
[137] Z. Zhao, K. M. Barijough, and A. Gerstlauer, “DeepThings: Distributed
adaptive deep learning inference on resource-constrained IoT edge clus-
ters,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr . Circuits Syst., vol. 37,
no. 11, pp. 2348–2359, Nov. 2018.
[138] M. Xu, F. Qian, M. Zhu, F. Huang, S. Pushp, and X. Liu, “DeepWear:
Adaptive local ofﬂoading for on-wearable deep learning,” IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput. , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 314–330, Feb. 2020.
[139] T. Chen, S. Barbarossa, X. Wang, G. B. Giannakis, and Z. Zhang,
“Learning and management for Internet of Things: Accounting for
adaptivity and scalability,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 778–796,
Apr. 2019.
[140] L. Zeng, E. Li, Z. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Boomerang: On-demand coop-
erative deep neural network inference for edge intelligence on the
industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 96–103,
Sep. 2019.
[141] V . Nguyen, P . Lin, and R. Hwang, “Energy depletion attacks in low
power wireless networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 51915–51932,
2019.
[142] L. Kang and H. Shen, “Preventing battery attacks on electrical vehicles
based on data-driven behavior modeling,” in Proc. 10th ACM/IEEE Int.
Conf. Cyber Phys. Syst. (ICCPS) , 2019, pp. 35–46.
[143] I. Tomi ´c and J. A. McCann, “A survey of potential security issues in
existing wireless sensor network protocols,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 1910–1923, Dec. 2017.
[144] I. Farris, T. Taleb, Y . Khettab, and J. Song, “A survey on emerging
SDN and NFV security mechanisms for IoT systems,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 812–837, 1st Quart., 2019.
[145] C. X. Lu et al., “Snoopy: Snifﬁng your smartwatch passwords via deep
sequence learning,” Proc. ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol., vol. 1, no. 4, p. 152, Jan. 2018.
[146] H. Hu, C. Lin, C. Chang, and L. Chen, “Enhanced secure data backup
scheme using multi-factor authentication,” IET Inf. Security, vol. 13,
no. 6, pp. 649–658, 2019.
[147] J. Zhao, X. Xie, X. Xu, and S. Sun, “Multi-view learning overview:
Recent progress and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 38, pp. 43–54,
Nov. 2017.
[148] Y . Li, M. Y ang, and Z. Zhang, “A survey of multi-view represen-
tation learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 10,
pp. 1863–1883, Oct. 2019.
[149] D. Kim, K. Chung, and K. Hong, “Person authentication using face,
teeth and voice modalities for mobile device security,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2678–2685, Nov. 2010.
[150] H. Crawford, K. Renaud, and T. Storer, “A framework for continuous,
transparent mobile device authentication,” Comput. Security, vol. 39,
pp. 127–136, Nov. 2013.
[151] B. Zhou, J. Lohokare, R. Gao, and F. Y e, “EchoPrint: Two-
factor authentication using acoustics and vision on smartphones,” in
Proc. 24th
Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw. (MobiCom), 2018,
pp. 321–336.
[152] H. Gomi, S. Y amaguchi, K. Tsubouchi, and N. Sasaya, “Towards
authentication using multi-modal online activities,” in Proc. ACM Int.
Joint Conf. Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput. ACM Int. Symp. Wearable
Comput. (UbiComp), 2017, pp. 37–40.
[153] P . Kumar, S. Mukherjee, R. Saini, P . Kaushik, P . P . Roy, and
D. P . Dogra, “Multimodal gait recognition with inertial sensor data and
video using evolutionary algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 27,
no. 5, pp. 956–965, May 2019.
[154] H. Feng, K. Fawaz, and K. G. Shin, “Continuous authentication for
voice assistants,” in Proc. 23rd Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw.
(MobiCom), 2017, pp. 343–355.
[155] S. Pradhan, W. Sun, G. Baig, and L. Qiu, “Combating replay
attacks against voice assistants,” Proc. ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable
Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 3, no. 3, p. 100, Sep. 2019.
[156] J. Li et al., “Robust face recognition with deep multi-view representa-
tion learning,” in Proc. 24th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia (MM) , 2016,
pp. 1068–1072.
[157] C. L. P . Lim, W. L. Woo, S. S. Dlay, D. Wu, and B. Gao, “Deep mul-
tiview heartwave authentication,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 777–786, Feb. 2019.
[158] D. Hintze, E. Koch, S. Scholz, and R. Mayrhofer, “Location-based risk
assessment for mobile authentication,” in Proc. ACM Int. Joint Conf.
Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput. Adjunct (UbiComp), 2016, pp. 85–88.
[159] A. Wójtowicz and K. Joachimiak, “Model for adaptable context-
based biometric authentication for mobile devices,” Pers. Ubiquitous
Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 195–207, Apr. 2016.
[160] D. Hintze et al., “Cormorant: Ubiquitous risk-aware multi-modal bio-
metric authentication across mobile devices,” Proc. ACM Interact.
Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1–23,
Sep. 2019.
[161] E. Toch et al., “The privacy implications of cyber security systems:
A technological survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 51, no. 2, p. 36,
Feb. 2018.
[162] Y . X. M. Tan, A. Iacovazzi, I. Homoliak, Y . Elovici, and A. Binder,
“Adversarial attacks on remote user authentication using behavioral
mouse dynamics,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN),
2019, pp. 1–10.
[163] Q. He, Y . Xu, Z. Liu, J. He, Y . Sun, and R. Zhang, “A privacy-
preserving Internet of Things device management scheme based on
blockchain,” Int. J. Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1–12,
2018.
[164] S. Wang et al., “Adaptive federated learning in resource constrained
edge computing systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 1205–1221, Jun. 2019.
[165] G. Xu, H. Li, S. Liu, K. Y ang, and X. Lin, “V erifyNet: Secure and ver-
iﬁable federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. F orensics Security, vol. 15,
pp. 911–926, 2020.
[166] H. Liu, H. Ning, Y . Zhang, and L. T. Y ang, “Aggregated-proofs based
privacy-preserving authentication for V2G networks in the smart grid,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1722–1733, Oct. 2012.
[167] H. Gao, Z. Ma, S. Luo, and Z. Wang, “BFR-MPC: A blockchain-based
fair and robust multi-party computation scheme,” IEEE Access,v o l .7 ,
pp. 110439–110450, 2019.
Yunji Liang received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2016.
He is an Associate Professor with Northwestern Polytechnical University.
From 2012 to 2017, he worked with the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA, as a Visiting Scholar and the Postdoctoral Researcher. His research
interests include pervasive computing, social computing, and intelligent
system.
Sagar Samtani received the Ph.D. degree in management information systems
from the Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA, in 2018.
He is an Assistant Professor and the Grant Thornton Scholar with
the Operations and Decision Technologies Department, Kelley School of
Business, Indiana University, Tampa, FL, USA. His research interests include
cyber threat intelligence, AI for cybersecurity, dark Web analytics, and
interpretable deep learning.
Bin Guo received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan, in 2009.
He was a Postdoctoral Researcher with Institut TELECOM SudParis,
Évry, France. He is a Professor with Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an, China. His research interests include ubiquitous computing and mobile
crowdsensing.
Zhiwen Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2005.
He is a Professor with Northwestern Polytechnical University. He has
worked as an Alexander V on Humboldt Fellow with Mannheim University,
Mannheim, Germany, from November 2009 to October 2010, and as a
Research Fellow with Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, from February 2007
to January 2009. His research interests cover ubiquitous computing and HCI.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at San Antonio. Downloaded on June 30,2021 at 02:06:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE BREAK ---
